Design
======

:date: 2005-10-03 10:29
:tags: architecture,design,methodology,process,agile
:slug: 2005_10_03-design
:category: Architecture & Design
:status: published





**Content** 



The
Design model generally consists of UML diagrams plus narratives where necessary.
The model describes the static structure and dynamic behavior of each class. 
Additional non-behavioral requirements must also be included in the design
document.



In the 4+1 view, the design
is the details of how to implement the logical view and functional view.  It is
any additional information to fill out the component view, and the plans for the
final implementation.  The information added to each view is technical, not
business-oriented, and is an elaboration on the initial design decisions made as
part of
Architecture.



**Process** 



The
process of design refines the responsibility assignment begun by the
architecture effort.  This involves consideration of algorithm and data
structure.  It identifies opportunities for reuse via inheritance.  It applies
design patterns to create robust, reliable, reusable
software.



Note that the modeling
process seeks to create more refined and formal models of the problem universe. 
The design document is the next-to-final level of formality.  The final level is
the source code for the application
software.



**Standards** 



The
level of detail varies with the audience.  Experienced developers may be able to
proceed with a high-level class diagram.  Novice developers may require sequence
diagrams for more complex methods.








