The "The reader won't know what that means" Comment
===================================================

:date: 2021-02-16 08:00
:tags: writing
:slug: 2021_02_16-the_the_reader_wont_know_what_that_means_comment
:category: Technologies
:status: published

I have to admit, it's very difficult to respond to this comment. I have
to fight down the urge to say things like "The Reader is not an idiot,"
or "At some point, we have to assume they've seen a computer before."

AFAIK there's little or no useful data data on how much background
people buying technical books have.

Subjectively, it seems like folks who leave the most comments -- the
noisy few -- seem to balk at chapter 1 things, write a bad review or
blog post and move on.

It appears they expect to see chapter 1 reinforce their impressions of
their own skills and present the things they -- individually -- don't
yet know but tend to suspect. It needs to involve minimal surprises, and
no forward references to later chapters.

I wish I could write like that.

But I can't write like that. I feel the need to assume that some readers
actually do know some things and want the forward references so they can
skip around.

I feel the need to assume readers have seen another programming language
and have worked through a tutorial or two.

I may be wrong. It may be true that most readers buy exactly one book
and expect this to be an introduction to computers, languages, and
computer science. If so, I need to learn how to cater to their needs.

I may be right. People may have background in at least one language and
buy multiple books. If so, I don't think "the reader won't know what
that means" is really a helpful comment.

For some technical concepts, I like to rely on inductive definitions.
Rather than fussy formalisms, I think it's helpful to use concrete
examples. If there are weird edge cases or seeming contradictions, a
fussy definition may be helpful, but not as a starting point. The
comment "the reader won't know what that means" prior to the first
example is a teeth-grinding thing. Yes. They won't know. That's why the
rest of the paragraph is an example so the reader will know what it
means.

The good news is the reviewers are reading very closely and splitting
each hair. I am eternally grateful for the opportunity to grind my teeth
in exasperation.





