Fun
===

:date: 2010-03-07 17:28
:tags: #python
:slug: 2010_03_07-fun
:category: Technologies
:status: published

XKCD - http://xkcd.com/710/

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture#Syracuse_function

I remember learning about this as an undergrad at Syracuse University
in the 70's and didn't think much of it. It was just "one of those
things" that I heard about, and perhaps wrote a homework assignment
in APL or Algol-W.

http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=problems&id=14

The good old days. When a program to examine the conjecture was hours
of heavy thinking followed by carefully monitored run-times on an IBM
370. Computer time was money back in the day. Every minute counted.
And you could spend your precious budget checking the Syracuse
function or going out with friends.

My solution to the Project Euler problem is 18 lines of Python.

With a few memoization tricks, it runs in something like 3 seconds on
my little MacBook. Back in the day, I don't think it even compiled
that quickly.



-----

My solution is about twice as many lines of Java, ...
-----------------------------------------------------

Bill the Lizard<noreply@blogger.com>

2010-03-05 13:15:29.678000-05:00

My solution is about twice as many lines of Java, but I didn't use any
memoization tricks so it would get a bit longer. Even without caching
any values it only took about 9 seconds (on a fairly new desktop
machine). It would certainly speed things up if I stored the lengths of
the sequences, at least for each starting value. It would probably
complicate the code beyond all recognition if I tried to cache all of
the intermediate values as well.





