Aristotle's Poetics and Project Management
==========================================

:date: 2010-01-28 08:00
:tags: software process improvement,project management
:slug: 2010_01_28-aristotles_poetics_and_project_management
:category: Technologies
:status: published

It can be a fatal mistake to impose a story arc on a project.

Aristotle's
`Poetics <http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/poetics.html>`__ is a
commentary on drama, in which he identified two story arcs that are
sure-fire hits: Big Man Brought Down, and Small Man Lifted Up. These
are the standard "Change in Fortune" story lines that we like.

Most movies in the category called "westerns" have elements of
both. When we look at a movie like "Who Shot Liberty Valance", we
see both changes in fortune intertwined in this story.

Movies, further, have a well-defined three-act structure with an
opening that introduces characters, context and the dramatic
situations. Within the first minutes of the film, there will be
some kind of initiating incident that clarifies the overall
conflict and sets up the character's goals. We can call this the
narrative framework. Or a story design pattern.

Project Narrative
-----------------

A "project" -- in principle -- has a narrative arc, much like a
movie. Walker Royce (`Project Management: A Unified
Framework <http://www.amazon.com/Software-Project-Management-Unified-Framework/dp/0201309580>`__)
breaks big waterfall-like projects into four acts (or "phases"):

-  Inception
-  Elaboration
-  Construction
-  Transition

Even if done in a spiral, instead of a waterfall, these are the
acts in the narrative between the opening "Fade In:" and the
closing credits.

In some cases, folks will try to impose this four-act structure on
an otherwise Agile method. It's often a serious mistake to attempt
to impose this convention of fiction on reality.

Things That Don't Exist
-----------------------

One of the most important parts of the narrative arc is
"inception". Every story has a "beginning".

Projects, however, do not always have a clear beginning. They can
have a "kick-off" meeting, but that's only a fictionalized
beginning. Work began long before the kick-off meeting. Often, the
kick-off is just a one small part of Inception.

Some projects will have a well-defined narrative structure.
Projects labeled "strategic", however, do not ever have this
structure. They can't.

For large projects, something happened before "inception"; this is
a real part of the project. The fiction is that the project
somehow begins with the inception phase. This narrative framework
is simply wrong; the folks that helped plan and execute inception
know this thing that filmmakers call "back story". This
pre-inception stuff is a first-class part of the project, even
though it's not an official part of the narrative framework.

Even if you have an elaborate governance process for projects,
there's a lot that happens before the first governance tollgate.
In really dysfunctional organizations, there can be a two-tiered
inception, where there's a big project to gather enough
information to justify the project governance meeting to justify
the rest of the work. The "rest of the work" -- the real project
-- starts with an "inception" effort that's a complete
falsification. It has to ignore (or at best summarize) the stuff
that happened prior to inception.

The Price of Ignorance
----------------------

The Narrative Arc of a project requires us to collect things into
an official Inception or story setup. It absolutely requires that
we discard things that happened before inception.

Here's what happens.

Users say they want something. "Automated customer name
resolution". Something that does an immediate one-click credit
check on prospective B2B e-commerce customers.

In order to justify the project, we do some preliminary work. We
talk to our vendors and discover that business names are always
ambiguous, and there's no such thing as one-click resolution. So
we write sensible requirements. Not the user's original dream.

We have a kick-off meeting for a quick, three-sprint project. We
have one user story that involves two multi-step alternative
scenarios. We have some refactoring in the first sprint, then
we'll build one scenario for the most-common case, then the other
scenario for some obscure special cases.

When we get ready for release, the customer asks about the
one-click thing.

"What one-click thing?" we ask.

"I always understood that this would be one-click," the customer
says.

"Do you recall the project governance meetings, the signed-off
requirements and the kick-off meeting? You were there. We walked
through the story and the scenarios. There can't be one-click."

Communicate More? Hardly
------------------------

What can be done to "prevent" this? Essentially, nothing.

The standard project narrative framework -- start, work, finish --
or perhaps inception, elaboration, construction, transition --
doesn't actually exist.

Stuff happened "before" the start is part of the project. We can
claim (or hope) that it doesn't exist, but it really does. We can
claim that a project has a "start", but it doesn't. It sort of
eases into being based on lots of preliminary conversations.

When the users asked for "one click", it was a result of several
other conversations that happened before going to the business
analyst to ask for the additional feature.

Indeed, the "one click" was a compromise (of sorts) reached
between a bunch of non-IT people having a conversation prior to
engaging the business analyst to start the process of starting the
project. All of that back story really is part of the project,
irrespective of the requirements of the project's standard
narrative structure.

Bottom Line
-----------

Poetics don't apply to large, strategic projects. A project is a
subtle and complex thing. There's no tidy narrative arc. Backstory
matters; it can't be summarized out of existence with a kick-off
slide show.





