Finding Simplicity
==================

:date: 2010-07-01 08:00
:tags: software process improvement,design,analysis
:slug: 2010_07_01-finding_simplicity
:category: Technologies
:status: published

In Creating Complexity Where None Existed, I noted that it's possible to
create complexity out of thin air.

Indeed, by wallowing in the supposed drama, one can turn the
differences between sales and service delivery into a hopelessly
complex situation. A focus on a manufactured "conflict" leads to the
following question: "What are the standard techniques for conflict
resolution ?"

Standard Techniques. Conflict Resolution.

First, there's no "conflict". Sales offers something. The customer
may or may not understand that offer. The customer commits to
something. Sales may or may not understand what the customer thinks
they're buying. And delivery has to fill in these gaps between what
sales offered and what the customer thought they were buying.

It's very simple. I called the lawn service, asking someone to mow my
lawn. But they didn't trim my hedge. No one asked me if I had a
hedge. I didn't have one when I called. I had it put in after I
placed the order for the services. Is this "conflict"? Does it
require "resolution"? Or, does it require that the folks selling the
services on the phone and the folks delivering the service have some
smarter way of coping with the inevitable differences of
understanding?

**Reality**

The trick to avoiding 482 words of drama (using code names!) to
describe sales and delivery is simple. Get Out Of Fantasy Land.

In the real world, sales has one view of the order, and delivery has
a different view.

This is not news. Accounts cope with this variability all the time.
They ask people to create a "budget" or a "plan". And then they
measure actual expenditures against the budget. Budgets changes.
Actuals don't match the budget. This is not "conflict". There's
nothing to "resolve".

There's planned and actual and they're different.

The real sales promise, memorialized in an "order" is one thing. This
order can change, of course, making things complex.

The delivery on that promise, memorialized in an "invoice" is another
thing. The delivery may be done in "scramble" mode; folks struggling
to balance ability to deliver against promises made. Or, the delivery
may be done in a more leisurely pace; the work being fit in to a
schedule as time and resources permit.

Ideally -- of course -- order and invoice match. In reality, they
don't always match.

Before the invoice is sent, someone needs to be sure it matches
reality; someone has to affirm that the work was actually done. It
may not be what the customer ordered, in which case there will be
issues to resolve.

But there is not "conflict". There's no "drama". We don't need to
assign code names ("Flintstones", "Rubbles") to sales and delivery.

Above all, we don't need to impose a weird legacy software world-view
on something as simple as order, delivery and invoice. Sales has
orders. Delivery has invoices. Hopefully, sales order changes get to
delivery in time to adjust what's really happening. Some has to look
at the mismatches and exceptions to determine what the consequences
are. Maybe the customer gets a credit. Maybe someone sales is
over-promising. Maybe someone in delivery, is under-delivering.





