Events: PyCon 2016, OSCon 2016
==============================

:date: 2015-11-17 08:00
:tags: #python,oscon,pycon,education
:slug: 2015_11_17-events_pycon_2016_oscon_2016
:category: Technologies
:status: published

Many years ago ('07?) I went to my first PyCon. My situation changed and
I didn't get to another PyCon until last year.


The story is a kind of major dumbosity. In '07 I could expense the
trip as education. In '08, I'd lost that feature of my employment.
After that I was actively figuring out how to be self-employed as a
writer and technomad, and completely took my eye off the various
kinds of tax deductions and sponsorship opportunities that I might
have leveraged. It was too complex, arbitrary, and bewildering for
me.




PyCon is an energizing event.  I can't say enough good things
about attending session after session on Python and the
Python-related ecosystem. In particular, it's a joy to see
people pitching their solutions to complex problems.



Here's a reminder: https://us.pycon.org/2016/



Since I do some work for O'Reilly media -- if a pair of
webcasts count as work -- I think I want to see if I can
finagle my way into OSCon, also.


Here's the reminder: http://conferences.oreilly.com/oscon/open-source


I think I can leverage some material from `Functional Python
Programming <https://www.packtpub.com/application-development/functional-python-programming>`__
to create an interesting tutorial.  My webcast on the five kinds of
Python functions can expand into a bunch of hands-on-keyboard
exercises to build examples of each kind of callable thingy.


Proposals are in. Waiting for comments. Fingers crossed.





