Meetings
========

:date: 2009-08-26 22:33
:tags: agile,software process improvement,scrum
:slug: 2009_08_26-meetings
:category: Technologies
:status: published

I found this note while cleaning up. I think it's a summary of John
Cleese's short movie "`Meetings Bloody
Meetings <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0295434/>`__".

#.  **Plan**. Why are we meeting? What's the purpose? What are the
    subjects?

#.  **Inform**. Tell the attendees what, why and the expected outcome.

#.  **Prepare**. Create an agenda, with a time line, and the items to
    be covered.

#.  **Structure**. If the purpose is to make a decision, this involves
    presentation of evidence, interpretation of the evidence and a
    decision. If the purpose is to inform, then present the
    information.

#. **Summarize and Record**.

I hear complaints about time wasted in meetings. This complaint is
absolutely justified. I've wasted a lot of my professional career in
dumb meetings.

**Out of Touch Management**. The out-of-touch manager requires long
meetings in which each direct report provides a complete status
report. The all-hands meeting appears to be the only time the
out-of-touch manager ever talks to anyone. Consequently, it devolves
to a sequence of one-on-one meetings which the rest of the team is
forced to attend.

If the goal is for many people to inform one person, those
conversations don't require a meeting.

**Going Through The Motions**. The going-through-the-motions manager
is aware that a staff meeting is expected, but has nothing really to
say or do. These meetings often devolve into awkward silences as
open-ended questions are thrown out to try and stimulate some
interaction.

If there's no goal (no decision, no information) then there's no
purpose for the meeting.

Best Practice
-------------

In the days before agility, I worked with two project managers who
gathered information in one-on-one meetings. These are separate
projects for separate customers. But the same best practice.

The PM would stop by your cube, figure out what you were doing, what
you needed, what you were planning to accomplish. Then, at the
ever-so-brief staff meeting, a few key interactions among the staff
would be lifted up from all those one-on-one meetings.

Let's review the brilliance of these two PM's.

#.  They stopped by your cube. They did not play the power game and
    make you come to their office. They stopped by. In later years
    this was called "`Management by Walking
    Around <http://1000ventures.com/business_guide/mgmt_mbwa.html>`__"
    -- something hailed as brilliant. These PM's just did it.

#.  They hung around long enough to actually get what was going on.
    They didn't waste time asking you to write and email status to
    them. They asked, listened, understood and summarized your status
    for you.

#.  They recognized the needs for interaction and made them happen.
    The status meetings were like `daily scrum
    meetings <http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/daily-scrum>`__.
    Since they were weekly, they weren't as brief, but they were just
    as focused. No long status reports. No long conversations.

Objections
----------

Some managers don't have time to sit in everyone's cubicle. This
overstates their value as managers by understating the huge cost
of wasting everyone's time in serial one-on-one's done in a
conference room. 12 direct reports means 13 man-hours wasted in a
one hour meeting.

Some managers don't have time to write status reports. Instead
they forward emails all day.

It's probably better to get off the email treadmill. Get status,
write short, to-the-point status reports.

Focus
-----

Developers (DBA's, Sys Admins, all technical folk) live in a world
of technology delivery.

Mangers, however, live in a world of budgets, status reports, and
weird exercises in foretelling the future. ("How long will it
take? How much will it cost?")

There's no good reason to impose the world of status reporting and
fortune-telling on technical people. There are, however, lots of
bad reasons for imposing unplanned, unprepared and unstructured
meetings on a team that would rather be building product than
talking about building product.



-----

"Consequently, it devolves to a sequence of o...
-----------------------------------------------------

DanDan<noreply@blogger.com>

2010-07-27 10:42:14.528000-04:00

"Consequently, it devolves to a sequence of one-on-one meetings which
the rest of the team is forced to attend."

This made me smile...

Until I realized that the real tragedy is how widely disseminated this
kind of mismanagement is.

Great post.





