Ways to Complicate Use Case Analysis
====================================

:date: 2010-04-13 09:52
:tags: software process improvement
:slug: 2010_04_13-ways_to_complicate_use_case_analysis
:category: Technologies
:status: published

I sat through a great use case analysis session recently.

"Great" because I saw lots of ways to derail a simple process.
Eventually, we did identify a couple of actors and a couple of use
cases. But it took hours and hours.

Bonus: this was the third go-round on these exact use cases.

Requirements Gathering
----------------------

The first go-round of requirements gathering was a conference call.
We produced some nice notes. Very good stuff.

The various whiteboarding tools available with Skype work pretty
well. We could sketch stuff, and collect notes, and digest the
conversation down to a tidy document.

The actual work went pretty well. Stuff got built. The principal
users need -- of course -- to review the preliminary stuff. There's a
first sprint to build stuff, followed by some chance to comment,
followed by a second sprint to finalize.

Focus was lost two ways. One, the technical folks were derailed by
other, more important projects. Customer pilots, reinstallation on a
new host, and an unrelated project threw down trump cards. Second --
and more important -- the principal users simply could not find time
or interest to review the preliminary stuff.

Trying Again
------------

For no sensible reason, we had a second go-round of requirements
gathering. The core problem is that the users simply won't take the
time to try something out on their own. They're sales folks, without
an actual customer in the room, they seem incapable of doing
anything. This kind of world view takes some getting used to.

Instead of previewing what was available, they insisted on more
requirements gathering. What we got was a random document that
purported to describe what the actors might do. It was intended to
repeat the initial phone call with more focus. Instead it had lots of
"We'll need to talk about this" parenthetical comments.

In short, it was impossible for them to even set down a coherent idea
on paper. All they could do was talk about it. There was no
alternative to a conversation.

Round Three
-----------

In order to make some progress, our Adobe FLEX developers were
brought in to create something a little snappier than the simplistic
HTML interface we had been working on. We redid the entire
requirements gathering for them.

The principle users -- sales folks -- did not want any of the
previous requirements gathering results brought in. We had to have a
"conversation", repeating the entire previous effort from the ground
up.

And -- of course -- all of the previous dead-ends, bad ideas, logical
impossibilities and business impossibilities had to be repeated yet
again. Data that's never been available was still spoken of as
"required". The conversation on why the data cannot possibly exist
had to be rehashed.

Derailing
---------

What's derailing the process is simple. The sales folks cannot work
independently. Each interaction must be a hands-on, guided tour of
the software in which the sales folks say random things that must be
ignored.

At some point in the future, there's a remote possibility that
someone will login on their own and actually run the demo that's been
in place for months.

As developers, we have been remiss in not catering to their learning
style. They cannot think without talking, and they cannot take action
unless they're influencing someone. Asking them to test the demo site
is unproductive because they simply wont. Asking them for "comments"
can be troublesome because they're job is influence, not simply
provide a simplified "ok/not ok" feedback on specific features of the
implementation of their use case.

Broad Not Deep
--------------

Additionally, we have folks that keep trying to define the
requirements in broad, sweeping terms. They're uncomfortable with an
end-to-end use case. At each step in the interaction they want to
define all the possible future courses of events and interactions and
consequences of each alternative course.

Folks with the big-picture view have a hard time writing a use case
that describes a task from beginning to the end. Even basic concepts
like "Creating Business Value" can be elusive since the possibilities
are limitless.

As developers, we were successful at focusing down on a complete use
case. With some effort we got from the user's initial interaction to
the final bit of business value.




